[WIP] EIP-7594: PeerDAS protocol (#3574)
ethereum/consensus-specs: specs/_features/peerdas/p2p-interface.md

    # KZG batch verifies that the cells match the corresponding commitments and proofs
    return verify_cell_proof_batch(
        row_commitments=sidecar.kzg_commitments,
        row_ids=row_ids,  # all rows
        column_ids=[sidecar.index],
        datas=sidecar.column,
        proofs=sidecar.kzg_proofs,
    )
```

##### `verify_data_column_sidecar_inclusion_proof`

```python
def verify_data_column_sidecar_inclusion_proof(sidecar: DataColumnSidecar) -> bool:
    """
    Verify if the given KZG commitments included in the given beacon block.
    """
    gindex = get_subtree_index(get_generalized_index(BeaconBlockBody, 'blob_kzg_commitments'))
    return is_valid_merkle_branch(
        leaf=hash_tree_root(sidecar.kzg_commitments),
        branch=sidecar.kzg_commitments_inclusion_proof,
        depth=KZG_COMMITMENTS_INCLUSION_PROOF_DEPTH,
        index=gindex,
        root=sidecar.signed_block_header.message.body_root,
    )
```

##### `compute_subnet_for_data_column_sidecar`

```python
def compute_subnet_for_data_column_sidecar(column_index: LineIndex) -> SubnetID:
    return SubnetID(column_index % DATA_COLUMN_SIDECAR_SUBNET_COUNT)
```

> ### The gossip domain: gossipsub

Reviewer: Should add deprecation of topic `blob_sidecar_{subnet_id}`

Reviewer 2: +1

Author: I think blob sidecar subnets could be a backup channel for data distribution during the fork transition. Maybe let's revisit it after evaluate the performance and network stability in prototyping?

Reviewer 2: but the nodes wouldn't have full blobs (commented the same elsewhere as well)

Author: addressed in https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/pull/3574/commits/d23452d02bb54e9bffc5547fde00cfd1537d6d42

> Some gossip meshes are upgraded in the fork of Pe to support upgraded types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some gossip meshes are upgraded in the PeerDAS fork to support upgraded types.
```

- _[REJECT]_ The sidecar's column data is valid as verified by `verify_data_column_sidecar_kzg_proof(sidecar)`.
- _[IGNORE]_ The sidecar is the first sidecar for the tuple `(block_header.slot, block_header.proposer_index, sidecar.index)` with valid header signature, sidecar inclusion proof, and kzg proof.
- _[REJECT]_ The sidecar is proposed by the expected `proposer_index` for the block's slot in the context of the current shuffling (defined by `block_header.parent_root`/`block_header.slot`).
  If the `proposer_index` cannot immediately be verified against the expected shuffling, the sidecar MAY be queued for later processing while proposers for the block's branch are calculated -- in such a case _do not_ `REJECT`, instead `IGNORE` this message.

*Note:* In the `verify_data_column_sidecar_inclusion_proof(sidecar)` check, for all the sidecars of the same block, it verifies against the same set of `kzg_commitments` of the given beacon beacon. Client can choose to cache the result of the arguments tuple `(sidecar.kzg_commitments, sidecar.kzg_commitments_inclusion_proof, sidecar.signed_block_header)`.

> ### The Req/Resp domain

Reviewer: Should add the deprecation of `/eth2/beacon_chain/req/blob_sidecars_by_root/1/` and `/eth2/beacon_chain/req/blob_sidecars_by_range/1/`

Reviewer 2: may be by range can be deprecated, by root might still be useful ?

Reviewer 3: Is there a replacement for `by_range` for syncing? 
I'm not familiar with sync, but I'm guessing we would be doing sampling for every slot as well when syncing - does that mean we request `SAMPLES_PER_SLOT` (8) samples via `DataColumnSidecarByRoot` for every block?

Or is there a way to batch these requests? e.g. requesting `List[Tuple[Slot, ColumnIndex]]` or `List[Tuple[Slot, SubnetId]]`?

Reviewer: > We don't need to sample finalized blocks since we know data was available based on the votes

When syncing you don't know what's finalized ahead of time. Requiring a majority assumption is not okay IMO, why not sample if the network can serve you the samples?

Reviewer 3: Yeah that makes sense to me I think. I guess it would be the same as Deneb today - we perform data availability check (sampling now instead) for all slots within the last `MIN_EPOCHS_FOR_BLOB_SIDECARS_REQUESTS` epochs.

#### Messages

##### DataColumnSidecarByRoot v1

**Protocol ID:** `/eth2/beacon_chain/req/data_column_sidecar_by_root/1/`

*[New in Deneb:EIP4844]*

The `<context-bytes>` field is calculated as `context = compute_fork_digest(fork_version, genesis_validators_root)`:

[1]: # (eth2spec: skip)

| `fork_version`           | Chunk SSZ type                |
|--------------------------|-------------------------------|
| `PEERDAS_FORK_VERSION`     | `peerdas.DataColumnSidecar`           |

Request Content:

```
(
  DataColumnIdentifier
)
```

Response Content:

```
(
  DataColumnSidecar
)

> ```

Reviewer: Suggesting non-contentious spec for the req resp protocol.  Do not commit this suggestion directly as it removes the triple back quotes from the response content

```suggestion
Requests sidecars by block root and index.
The response is a list of `DataColumnSidecar` whose length is less than or equal to the number of requests.
It may be less in the case that the responding peer is missing blocks or sidecars.

Before consuming the next response chunk, the response reader SHOULD verify the data column sidecar is well-formatted, has valid inclusion proof, and is correct w.r.t. the expected KZG commitments through `verify_data_column_sidecar_kzg_proof`.

The response MUST consist of zero or more `response_chunk`.
Each _successful_ `response_chunk` MUST contain a single `DataColumnIdentifier ` payload.

Clients MUST support requesting sidecars since `minimum_request_epoch`, where `minimum_request_epoch = max(finalized_epoch, current_epoch - MIN_EPOCHS_FOR_BLOB_SIDECARS_REQUESTS, DENEB_FORK_EPOCH)`. If any root in the request content references a block earlier than `minimum_request_epoch`, peers MAY respond with error code `3: ResourceUnavailable` or not include the data column sidecar in the response.

Clients MUST respond with at least one sidecar, if they have it.
Clients MAY limit the number of blocks and sidecars in the response.

Clients SHOULD include a sidecar in the response as soon as it passes the gossip validation rules.
Clients SHOULD NOT respond with sidecars related to blocks that fail gossip validation rules.
Clients SHOULD NOT respond with sidecars related to blocks that fail the beacon chain state transition
```

Reviewer 4: I think the intent of `DataColumnSidecarByRoot` is to serve only one sidecar. If it is intended to serve many, it would be named `DataColumnSidecarsByRoot` already. I don't know why it's supposed to serve only one.

However, if you want to change it to serve many, I think it's a good idea to also change the name, the request content, and the response content as well.

Author: addressed in https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/pull/3574/commits/87e9702ab0267b4c2320aff31f09a550f744652b
